docs: ADR-4: max collateral utilization (#940)
umee-network/umee: docs/architecture/ADR-003-borrow-assets.md

- September 27, 2021: Initial Draft (@toteki)
- September 29, 2021: Changed design after review suggestions (@toteki, @alexanderbez, @brentxu)
- October 5, 2021: MsgSetCollateral and borrower-address-prefixed store keys (@toteki)
- December 16, 2021: Collateral storage updated to use module account
- May 20, 2022: Introduce collateral max utilization (@robert-zaremba)

## Status

Accepted

## Context

One of the base functions of the Umee universal capital facility is to allow users to borrow allowed asset types, using their own uTokens (obtained normally, by depositing assets) as a collateral.

## Decision

The Cosmos `x/bank` module and the existing `umee/x/leverage` deposit features are prerequisites for these new capabilities.

The flow of events is as follows:

> - Borrower already has uTokens in their account.
> - Borrower marks his uTokens as eligible for collateral using the `x/leverage` module account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Borrower already has uTokens in their balance.
- Borrower marks his uTokens as collateral, which transfers them to the `x/leverage` module account.
```

- Borrower requests to borrow assets from `x/leverage` module. The module validates the request, disburses tokens if acceptable, and stores borrow position.
- While the borrow position is open, transactions that would result the borrow position being higher than its calculated borrow limit are prevented (i.e. borrowing too much, withdrawing too many uTokens that are being used as collateral, disabling collateral).
- Eventually, the borrower repays the borrowed position (in full or in part).

Additionally, the following events occur at `EndBlock`:

> - Fess are added to the open borrow positions based on token-specific interest rate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fees are added to the open borrow positions based on token-specific interest rate.
```

The `umee/x/leverage` module stores each open borrow position.
If the same user account opens multiple borrow positions in the same token, the second position simply increases the amount of the first.

Additionally, rather than segregating each borrow position with a specific collateral deposit (uToken coins) we aggregate them. The sum of all account's collateral uTokens related is used to calculate the account's borrow limit.

> We define a **borrow limit** invariant:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We define a **borrow limit**:
```
Not truly an invariant, because interest and price movements can make it false.

Author: true, how about using `guard`?

Author: ok

\__sum of account's borrow positions must be smaller than the account borrow limit_.

Note that the exchange rate of Asset:u-Asset has a dynamic exchange rate that grows with accruing interest - see [ADR-001: Interest Stream](./ADR-001-interest-stream.md).

In contrast, the exchange rate of collateral:borrowed assets (e.g. `atom:ether`) can only be determined using a price oracle.

The calculated borrow limit, which weighs collateral uTokens against borrowed assets (e.g. `u/atom:ether`) is derived from combining the two above. The weight of each uToken is defined as `CollateralWeight`.

Note also that as a consequence of uToken interest, the asset value of uToken collateral increases over time, meaning a user who repays positions in full and redeems collateral uTokens will receive back more base assets than they deposited originally, reducing the effective interest.

## Detailed Design

> For the purposes of borrowing and repaying assets, as well as marking uTokens as collateral, the `umee/x/leverage` module does not mint or burn tokens. It stores borrower open positions and collateral settings, and the `x/bank` module to perform all necessary balance checks and token transfers. User collateral (uTokens) are deposited in `x/leverage` module and withdrawn back to the user `x/bank` account balance when the user disables uTokens as a collateral.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the purposes of borrowing and repaying assets, as well as marking uTokens as collateral, the `umee/x/leverage` module does not mint or burn tokens. It stores borrower open positions and collateral settings, and uses the `x/bank` module to perform all necessary balance checks and token transfers. User collateral (uTokens) are deposited in `x/leverage` module and withdrawn back to the user `x/bank` account balance when the user disables uTokens as a collateral.
```

> During every operation which involves borrow position or collateral we check that the _borrow limit_ invariant holds.

Reviewer: Rephrase to avoid "invariant"

Author: updated to "rule"

`x/oracle` module is used to provide exchange rates of tokens to calculate borrow limit.

### API

To implement the borrow/repay functionality of the Asset Facility, the three message types are defined:

```go
// MsgSetCollateral - a borrower enables or disables a specific uToken type in their wallet to be used as collateral
type MsgSetCollateral struct {
  Borrower sdk.AccAddress `json:"borrower" yaml:"borrower"`

>   // not a uToken

Reviewer: Currently a uToken - although it might be cleaner to simplify to base asset before 3.0.0

Author: I wanted to address Asset - Token nomenclature in other PR.

Reviewer: Clarification: This message uses `uToken`, not ` token` denomination - so it would succeed on input `u/uumee` and fail on input `uumee`.

  Denom    string         `json:"denom" yaml:"denom"`
  Enable   bool           `json:"enable" yaml:"enable"`
}

// MsgBorrowAsset - a user wishes to borrow assets of an allowed type
type MsgBorrowAsset struct {
  Borrower sdk.AccAddress `json:"borrower" yaml:"borrower"`
  // not a uToken
  Amount   sdk.Coin       `json:"amount" yaml:"amount"`
}

// MsgRepayAsset - a user wishes to repay assets of a borrowed type
type MsgRepayAsset struct {
  Borrower sdk.AccAddress `json:"borrower" yaml:"borrower"`

>   // uToken

Reviewer: Not a uToken

Reviewer: Clarification: It's a `token`, not ` uToken`. Naming aside, repay amount would be `ATOM` and not `u/ATOM` for example.

  Amount   sdk.Coin       `json:"amount" yaml:"amount"`
}
```

Tokens used in above messages must belong to the allow-list. Collateral must be a uToken.

Messages must be signed by the borrower's account.

Both CLI and gRPC must be supported for the above messages.

### Storage layout

Using the `sdk.Coins` built-in type, which combines multiple {Denom,Amount} pairs as a single object, the `umee/x/leverage` module stores open borrow and collateral positions as follows:

```go
// open borrows:

> borrowPrefix | lengthPrefixed(borrowerAddress) | tokenDenom = sdk.Int

Reviewer: Needs to be updated re:ADR-008

// borrower collateral settings for enabled denoms:

> collateralSettingPrefix | lengthPrefixed(borrowerAddress) | tokenDenom = true/false

Reviewer: ```suggestion
collateralSettingPrefix | lengthPrefixed(borrowerAddress) | tokenDenom = 0x01
```

The calculated borrow limit, which weighs collateral uTokens against borrowed assets (e.g. `u/atom:ether`) is derived from combining the two above. The weight of each uToken is defined as `CollateralWeight`.

Note also that as a consequence of uToken interest, the asset value of uToken collateral increases over time, meaning a user who repays positions in full and redeems collateral uTokens will receive back more base assets than they deposited originally, reducing the effective interest.

### Max collateral utilization

Definitions:

- `total_lend(tokenA)`: total amount of tokenA provided to the leverage protocol (including coins marked as a collateral).
- `supply_utilization(tokenA) = total_borrow(tokenA) / total_lend(tokenA)`. It equals 0 if there is no borrow for tokenA. It equals 1 if all provided tokenA are borrowed.
- `total_collateral(tokenA)` -- total amount of tokenA

We define a _token collateral utilization_ as ratio of borrowed collateral to the total amount of collateral of the token.

```
collateral_utilization(tokenA) = total_borrow(tokenA) / total_collateral(tokenA)

>                                = u/tokenA borrowed / (u/tokenA borrowed + u/tokenA module balance)

Author: Good question. 
I added more examples and updated the formula.

The answer for your example is `20 / (90+10-10) = 1/5`

During every operation which involves borrow position or collateral we check that the _borrow limit_ rule holds.

`x/oracle` module is used to provide exchange rates of tokens to calculate borrow limit.

### API

To implement the borrow/repay functionality of the Asset Facility, the three message types are defined:

```go
// MsgSetCollateral - a borrower enables or disables a specific uToken type in their wallet to be used as collateral
type MsgSetCollateral struct {
  Borrower sdk.AccAddress `json:"borrower" yaml:"borrower"`
  Denom    string         `json:"denom" yaml:"denom"`
  Enable   bool           `json:"enable" yaml:"enable"`
}

// MsgBorrowAsset - a user wishes to borrow assets of an allowed type
type MsgBorrowAsset struct {
  Borrower sdk.AccAddress `json:"borrower" yaml:"borrower"`
  // not a uToken
  Amount   sdk.Coin       `json:"amount" yaml:"amount"`
}

// MsgRepayAsset - a user wishes to repay assets of a borrowed type
type MsgRepayAsset struct {
  Borrower sdk.AccAddress `json:"borrower" yaml:"borrower"`
  Amount   sdk.Coin       `json:"amount" yaml:"amount"`
}

> 
> // MsgSetCollateralMaxUtilization is going to be used as CosmosSDK 0.46 gov message.
> type MsgSetCollateralMaxUtilization {
>   // must be x/gov
>   string signer = 1;
>   string token = 2;
>   // a number between 0 and 10'000 - ratio in basis points.
>   uint32 max_utilization = 3;
> }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Per-token parameters should be fields in the `Token` struct (stored in registry, updated as a whole by governance)

Author: OK, added to token registry. BTW - we will need to update the registry as well. I'm adding a task for that.

```

Tokens used in above messages must belong to the allow-list. Collateral must be a uToken.

Messages must be signed by the borrower's account.

Both CLI and gRPC must be supported for the above messages.

### Storage layout

> Using the `sdk.Coins` built-in type, which combines multiple {Denom,Amount} pairs as a single object, the `umee/x/leverage` module stores open borrow and collateral positions as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Borrow positions are stored using a mechanism discussed in ADR-008

Using the `sdk.Coins` built-in type, which combines multiple {Denom,Amount} pairs as a single object, the `umee/x/leverage` module stores collateral settings and positions as follows:
```

```go

> // open borrows:
> borrowPrefix | lengthPrefixed(borrowerAddress) | tokenDenom = sdk.Int

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

// borrower collateral settings for enabled denoms:
collateralSettingPrefix | lengthPrefixed(borrowerAddress) | tokenDenom = 0x01

// and the amount of collateral deposited for each uToken:
collateralAmountPrefix | lengthPrefixed(borrowerAddress) | tokenDenom = sdk.Int

> 
> // max token collateral utilization setings
> maxCollateralUtilizationPrefix | token = bigEndian(uint32)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Per-token parameters should be fields in the `Token` struct (stored in registry, updated as a whole by governance)

Author: OK

Stable assets will have high max collateral utilization (can go even to 99%). Volatile assets should have significant smaller collateral utilization.

## Detailed Design

For the purposes of borrowing and repaying assets, as well as marking uTokens as collateral, the `umee/x/leverage` module does not mint or burn tokens. It stores borrower open positions and collateral settings, and uses the `x/bank` module to perform all necessary balance checks and token transfers. User collateral (uTokens) are deposited in `x/leverage` module and withdrawn back to the user `x/bank` account balance when the user disables uTokens as a collateral.

During every operation which involves borrow position or collateral we check that the _borrow limit_ rule holds.

`x/oracle` module is used to provide exchange rates of tokens to calculate borrow limit.

### API

To implement the borrow/repay functionality of the Asset Facility, the three message types are defined:

```go
// MsgSetCollateral - a borrower enables or disables a specific uToken type in their wallet to be used as collateral
type MsgSetCollateral struct {
  Borrower sdk.AccAddress `json:"borrower" yaml:"borrower"`

>   // not a uToken

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Note also that as a consequence of uToken interest, the asset value of uToken collateral increases over time, meaning a user who repays positions in full and redeems collateral uTokens will receive back more base assets than they deposited originally, reducing the effective interest.

### Max collateral utilization

> We define a _collateral utilization_ as ratio of lended collateral to total amount of collateral per token. Collateral utilization is 0 when there is no borrow of given token collateral. It is equal to 1, when all token collateral is borrowed. Collateral utilization of token X is growing when lenders withdraw their token X collateral or borrowers take a new loan of token X.

Reviewer: Need clarification. Imagine 3 users:

- Alice lends `100 ATOM`, does not enable atom as collateral
- Bob lends `200 ATOM`, enables atom as collateral
- Charlie borrows `100 ATOM`

In this case, `borrow utilization` is `100/300`. (Equal to the amounts `borrowed / lent`)

Would collateral utilization be the same? Or would it be `100/100` (equal to `borrowed / collateral`).

If we desire the first option, we should stick to the existing concept `Borrow Utilization` and avoid using the word "collateral" to refer to ALL assets lent, whether enabled or disabled as collateral.

// and the amount of collateral deposited for each uToken:
collateralAmountPrefix | lengthPrefixed(borrowerAddress) | tokenDenom = sdk.Int

// max token collateral utilization setings

> maxCollateralUtilizationPrefix | token = bigEndian(uint32)

Reviewer: Is there a reason not to store it in the `Token` registry with the other per-token parameters?
